FAQ: How do I get a batch file to run when Windows 
shuts down? I already know how to get a batch file 
to run when Windows starts (put it in AUTOEXEC.BAT 
or the STARTUP folder).

Answer: The trick is to stop Windows from starting 
automatically. If you remember your old Windows 3.1 
days, you remember having to put WIN in your 
AUTOEXEC.BAT to start Windows. Any batch file you 
put after the WIN would be run AFTER Windows 
finished. Amazingly, the same trick works in Windows 
95. The only hard part is stopping Win95 from 
launching automatically. What you need to do is edit 
your C:\MSDOS.SYS file to include BootGUI=0 in the 
Options section:
[Options]
BootGUI=0
The only hard part is that MSDOS.SYS is a hidden, 
system, read-only file. You'll need to remove these 
attributes before you can edit it, then restore the 
attributes after you finish. Or you can download 
Microsoft's great "TweakUI" power toy. Try looking 
in one of these spots:
http://www.microsoft.com/windows/downloads/contents/PowerToys/W95TweakUI/default.asp
http://www.microsoft.com/windows/downloads/bin/W95tweakui.exe
On TweakUI's "Boot" tab, uncheck the "Start UI 
automatically" box.
Whether you use TweakUI or edit MSDOS.SYS manually, 
you'll now be able to add WIN and your shutdown batch 
file to your AUTOEXEC.BAT.

http://www.ericphelps.com
