	Installing John the Ripper.

First of all, most likely you do not need to install John the Ripper
system-wide.  Instead, after you extract the distribution archive and
possibly compile the source code (see below), you may simply enter the
"run" directory and invoke John from there.

System-wide installation is also supported, but it is intended for use
by packagers of John for *BSD "ports", Linux distributions, etc., rather
than by end-users.  (If you're in fact preparing a package of John,
please refer to the JOHN_SYSTEMWIDE setting in src/params.h.)

You may have obtained the source code or a "binary" (pre-compiled)
distribution of John the Ripper.  On Unix-like systems, it is typical
to get the source code and compile it into "binary" executables right
on the system you intend to run John on.  On DOS and Windows, however,
it is typical to get a binary distribution which is ready for use.

The following instructions apply to the source code distribution of
John only.  If you have a binary distribution, then there's nothing
for you to compile and you can start using John right away.


	Compiling the sources on a Unix-like system.

Enter the directory into which you extracted the source code
distribution of John.  Enter the "src" subdirectory and invoke "make"
to obtain a list of operating systems for which specific support
exists:

	cd src
	make

Note the make target for your system and type:

	make clean SYSTEM

where SYSTEM is the appropriate make target.  Alternatively, if your
system is not listed, use:

	make clean generic

If everything goes well, this will create the executables for John and
its related utilities under "../run/".  You can change directory to
there and start John, like this:

	cd ../run
	./john --test

Alternatively, you may copy the entire "run" directory to anywhere you
like and use John from there.


	A note on moving binaries between systems.

On some architectures, certain system hardware performance parameters
are detected at compile time; in particular, this is done for 32-bit
SPARC and for "generic" make targets.  If you then move the binary
executable to a different machine running the same OS, you might not
get the best performance.  Thus, it is recommended to re-compile John
on each system where possible.

$Owl: Owl/packages/john/john/doc/INSTALL,v 1.4 2006/01/02 04:43:25 solar Exp $
